The Project Gutenberg eBook, Gulliver's Travels, by Jonathan Swift, Edited
by Thomas M. Balliet


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Gulliver's Travels
       Into Several Remote Regions of the World


Author: Jonathan Swift

Editor: Thomas M. Balliet

Release Date: November 26, 2005  [eBook #17157]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GULLIVER'S TRAVELS***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Chuck Greif, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 17157-h.htm or 17157-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/1/2/17157/17157-h/17157-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/1/2/17157/17157-h.zip)





GULLIVER'S TRAVELS

Into Several Remote Regions of the World

by

JONATHAN SWIFT, D.D.

Edited with Introduction and Notes by Thomas M. Balliet
Superintendent of Schools, Springfield, Mass.

With Thirty-Eight Illustrations and a Map


PART I

A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT


PART II

A VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNAG







[Illustration: "HE COMMANDED HIS GENERALS TO DRAW UP THE TROOPS." P. 42.]




D.C. Heath & Co., Publishers
Boston New York Chicago

1900




PREFACE.

    And lo! the book, from all its end beguiled,
    A harmless wonder to some happy child.

    LORD LYTTON.


Gulliver's Travels was published in 1726; and, although it was by no
means intended for them, the book was soon appropriated by the children,
who have ever since continued to regard it as one of the most delightful
of their story books. They cannot comprehend the occasion which provoked
the book nor appreciate the satire which underlies the narrative, but
they delight in the wonderful adventures, and wander full of open-eyed
astonishment into the new worlds through which the vivid and logically
accurate imagination of the author so personally conducts them. And
there is a meaning and a moral in the stories of the Voyages to Lilliput
and Brobdingnag which is entirely apart from the political satire they
are intended to convey, a meaning and a moral which the youngest child
who can read it will not fail to seize, and upon which it is scarcely
necessary for the teacher to comment.

For young children the book combines in a measure the interest of
_Robinson Crusoe_ and that of the fairy tale; its style is objective,
the narrative is simple, and the matter appeals strongly to the childish
imagination. For more mature boys and girls and for adults the interest
is found chiefly in the keen satire which underlies the narrative. It
appeals, therefore, to a very wide range of intelligence and taste, and
can be read with profit by the child of ten and by the young man or
woman of mature years.

This edition is practically a reprint of the original (1726-27). The
punctuation and capitalization have been modernized, some archaisms
changed, and the paragraphs have been made more frequent. A few passages
have been omitted which would offend modern ears and are unsuitable for
children's reading, and some foot-notes have been added explaining
obsolete words and obscure expressions.

As a reading book in school which must be adapted to the average mind,
these stories will be found suitable for classes from the fifth or sixth
school year to the highest grade of the grammar school.

THOMAS M. BALLIET.




CONTENTS.

VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT.


CHAPTER I.

The Author gives some account of himself and family--His first
inducements to travel--He is shipwrecked, and swims for his life--Gets
safe on shore in the country of Lilliput--Is made a prisoner, and
carried up the country

CHAPTER II.

The emperor of Lilliput, attended by several of the nobility, comes to
see the Author in his confinement--The emperor's person and habits
described--Learned men appointed to teach the Author their language--He
gains favor by his mild disposition--His pockets are searched, and his
sword and pistols taken from him

CHAPTER III.

The Author diverts the emperor, and his nobility of both sexes, in a
very uncommon manner--The diversions of the court of Lilliput
described--The Author has his liberty granted him upon certain
conditions

CHAPTER IV.

Mildendo, the metropolis of Lilliput, described, together with the
emperor's palace--A conversation between the Author and a principal
secretary concerning the affairs of that empire--The Author's offers to
serve the emperor in his wars

CHAPTER V.

The Author, by an extraordinary stratagem, prevents an invasion--A high
title of honor is conferred upon him--Ambassadors arrive from the
emperor of Blefuscu, and sue for peace

CHAPTER VI.

Of the inhabitants of Lilliput; their learning, laws, and customs; the
manner of educating their children--The Author's way of living in that
country--His vindication of a great lady

CHAPTER VII.

The Author, being informed of a design to accuse him of high treason,
makes his escape to Blefuscu--His reception there

CHAPTER VIII.

The Author, by a lucky accident, finds means to leave Blefuscu; and
after some difficulties, returns safe to his native country

       *       *       *       *       *

LIST OF FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS.

    "He commanded his generals to draw up the troops"
     Map of Lilliput and Blefuscu
    "I lay all this while ... in great uneasiness"
    "Producing his credentials"
    "These gentlemen made an exact inventory"
    "Her imperial majesty was pleased to smile very graciously upon me"
    "And created me a _nardac_ upon the spot"
    "Three hundred tailors were employed"
    "The happiness ... of dining with me"
    "He desired I would hear him with patience"
    "I set sail ... at six in the morning"

AND TWENTY-THREE SMALLER ONES IN THE TEXT.
