The Project Gutenberg EBook of Time and the Gods, by
Lord Dunsany [Edward J. M. D. Plunkett]

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Time and the Gods

Author: Lord Dunsany [Edward J. M. D. Plunkett]

Posting Date: October 19, 2012 [EBook #8183]
Release Date: May, 2005
First Posted: June 27, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIME AND THE GODS ***




Produced by Joris Van Dael, Jerry Fairbanks, Suzanne L.
Shell, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team











[Transcriber's note: In the print book, the word Pegana is spelled with a
macron (long vowel symbol) over the first "a". In this e-book, the macron
has been omitted.]





TIME AND THE GODS




LORD DUNSANY

1905




CONTENTS


Preface

_Part I:_

    Time and the Gods

    The Coming of the Sea

    A Legend of the Dawn

    The Vengeance of Men

    When the Gods Slept

    The King That Was Not

    The Cave of Kai

    The Sorrow of Search

    The Men of Yarnith

    For the Honour of the Gods

    Night and Morning

    Usury

    Mlideen

    The Secret of the Gods

    The South Wind

    In the Land of Time

    The Relenting of Sarnidac

    The Jest of the Gods

    The Dreams of the Prophet

_Part II:_

    The Journey of the King




PREFACE


These tales are of the things that befell gods and men in Yarnith,
Averon, and Zarkandhu, and in the other countries of my dreams.





PART I.




TIME AND THE GODS


Once when the gods were young and only Their swarthy servant Time was
without age, the gods lay sleeping by a broad river upon earth. There
in a valley that from all the earth the gods had set apart for Their
repose the gods dreamed marble dreams. And with domes and pinnacles the
dreams arose and stood up proudly between the river and the sky, all
shimmering white to the morning. In the city's midst the gleaming
marble of a thousand steps climbed to the citadel where arose four
pinnacles beckoning to heaven, and midmost between the pinnacles there
stood the dome, vast, as the gods had dreamed it. All around, terrace
by terrace, there went marble lawns well guarded by onyx lions and
carved with effigies of all the gods striding amid the symbols of the
worlds. With a sound like tinkling bells, far off in a land of
shepherds hidden by some hill, the waters of many fountains turned
again home. Then the gods awoke and there stood Sardathrion. Not to
common men have the gods given to walk Sardathrion's streets, and not
to common eyes to see her fountains. Only to those to whom in lonely
passes in the night the gods have spoken, leaning through the stars, to
those that have heard the voices of the gods above the morning or seen
Their faces bending above the sea, only to those hath it been given to
see Sardathrion, to stand where her pinnacles gathered together in the
night fresh from the dreams of gods. For round the valley a great
desert lies through which no common traveller may come, but those whom
the gods have chosen feel suddenly a great longing at heart, and
crossing the mountains that divide the desert from the world, set out
across it driven by the gods, till hidden in the desert's midst they
find the valley at last and look with eyes upon Sardathrion.

In the desert beyond the valley grow a myriad thorns, and all pointing
towards Sardathrion. So may many that the gods have loved come to the
marble city, but none can return, for other cities are no fitting home
for men whose feet have touched Sardathrion's marble streets, where
even the gods have not been ashamed to come in the guise of men with
Their cloaks wrapped about their faces. Therefore no city shall ever
hear the songs that are sung in the marble citadel by those in whose
ears have rung the voices of the gods. No report shall ever come to
other lands of the music of the fall of Sardathrion's fountains, when
the waters which went heavenward return again into the lake where the
gods cool Their brows sometimes in the guise of men. None may ever hear
the speech of the poets of that city, to whom the gods have spoken.

It stands a city aloof. There hath been no rumour of it--I alone have
dreamed of it, and I may not be sure that my dreams are true.

       *       *       *       *       *

Above the Twilight the gods were seated in the after years, ruling the
worlds. No longer now They walked at evening in the Marble City hearing
the fountains splash, or listening to the singing of the men they
loved, because it was in the after years and the work of the gods was
to be done.

But often as they rested a moment from doing the work of the gods, from
hearing the prayers of men or sending here the Pestilence or there
Mercy, They would speak awhile with one another of the olden years
saying, "Rememberest thou not Sardathrion?" and another would answer
"Ah! Sardathrion, and all Sardathrion's mist-draped marble lawns
whereon we walk not now."

Then the gods turned to do the work of the gods, answering the prayers
of men or smiting them, and ever They sent Their swarthy servant Time
to heal or overwhelm. And Time went forth into the worlds to obey the
commands of the gods, yet he cast furtive glances at his masters, and
the gods distrusted Time because he had known the worlds or ever the
gods became.

One day when furtive Time had gone into the worlds to nimbly smite some
city whereof the gods were weary, the gods above the twilight speaking
to one another said:

"Surely we are the lords of Time and gods of the worlds besides. See
how our city Sardathrion lifts over other cities. Others arise and
perish but Sardathrion standeth yet, the first and the last of cities.
Rivers are lost in the sea and streams forsake the hills, but ever
Sardathrion's fountains arise in our dream city. As was Sardathrion
when the gods were young, so are her streets to-day as a sign that we
are the gods."

Suddenly the swart figure of Time stood up before the gods, with both
hands dripping with blood and a red sword dangling idly from his
fingers, and said:

"Sardathrion is gone! I have overthrown it!"

And the gods said:

"Sardathrion? Sardathrion, the marble city? Thou, thou hast overthrown
it? Thou, the slave of the gods?"

And the oldest of the gods said:

"Sardathrion, Sardathrion, and is Sardathrion gone?"

And furtively Time looked him in the face and edged towards him
fingering with his dripping fingers the hilt of his nimble sword.

Then the gods feared with a new fear that he that had overthrown Their
city would one day slay the gods. And a new cry went wailing through
the Twilight, the lament of the gods for Their dream city, crying:

"Tears may not bring again Sardathrion.

"But this the gods may do who have seen, and seen with unrelenting
eyes, the sorrows of ten thousand worlds--thy gods may weep for thee.

"Tears may not bring again Sardathrion.

"Believe it not, Sardathrion, that ever thy gods sent this doom to
thee; he that hath overthrown thee shall overthrow thy gods.

"How oft when Night came suddenly on Morning playing in the fields of
Twilight did we watch thy pinnacles emerging from the darkness,
Sardathrion, Sardathrion, dream city of the gods, and thine onyx lions
looming limb by limb from the dusk.

"How often have we sent our child the Dawn to play with thy fountain
tops; how often hath Evening, loveliest of our goddesses, strayed long
upon thy balconies.

"Let one fragment of thy marbles stand up above the dust for thine old
gods to caress, as a man when all else is lost treasures one lock of
the hair of his beloved.

"Sardathrion, the gods must kiss once more the place where thy streets
were once.

"There were wonderful marbles in thy streets, Sardathrion."

"Sardathrion, Sardathrion, the gods weep for thee."
